Access logging ratelimit tutorial (#2057)
solo-io/gloo: docs/content/security/rate_limiting/access_logs/_index.md

---
title: Access logs
weight: 50
description: Use access logs to determine request characteristics of rate-limit rule breaches.
---

In this tutorial we will see how to use 
[Access Logs]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/gloo_routing/gateway_configuration/access_logging" >}}) to determine common characteristics
of rate-limit offending requests.

### Setup

> Setup virtual service and settings to match rule priority [example]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/security/rate_limiting/rulepriority/#test-the-example" %}}).

Reviewer: Nit: wording
```suggestion
Let's start by setting up the virtual service and settings resources to match the rule priority [example]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/security/rate_limiting/rulepriority/#test-the-example" %}}).
```

            messageType: '%REQ(x-type)%'
            # We rate-limit on the x-number header
            number: '%REQ(x-number)%'
          path: /dev/accesslogs.txt # /dev/stdout works but will intermingle access logs with other envoy logs
{{< /highlight >}}

Run the following; you should get HTTP 429 Too Many Requests on the third request.
```shell
curl -H "x-type: Messenger" -H "x-number: 311" --head $(glooctl proxy url)
curl -H "x-type: Messenger" -H "x-number: 411" --head $(glooctl proxy url)
curl -H "x-type: Messenger" -H "x-number: 411" --head $(glooctl proxy url)
```

Now let's take a look at the Envoy access logs:

{{< tabs >}}
{{< tab name="/dev/accesslogs.txt" codelang="yaml">}}
kubectl exec deployment/gateway-proxy -n gloo-system -it -- cat /dev/accesslogs.txt
{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab name="/dev/stdout" codelang="shell">}}
# Print only log lines starting with {" (our access logs are formatted as JSON)
kubectl logs -n gloo-system deployment/gateway-proxy | grep '^{' | jq
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

You should see all three requests made, in order. Note that the third request got rate-limited, and has `RL` for a
response flag:

> {{< highlight json "hl_lines=30-30" >}}

Reviewer: Super nit:
```suggestion
{{< highlight json "hl_lines=30" >}}
```
Or was it supposed to be a multi line highlight?

  "systemTime": "2019-12-27T16:07:18.821Z",
  "path": "/",
  "targetDuration": "31",
  "protocol": "HTTP/1.1",
  "responseFlags": "-"
}
{
  "httpMethod": "HEAD",
  "systemTime": "2019-12-27T16:07:20.311Z",
  "path": "/",
  "targetDuration": "9",
  "protocol": "HTTP/1.1",
  "responseFlags": "-",
  "number": "411",
  "clientDuration": "9",
  "upstreamName": "default-petclinic-8080_gloo-system",
  "responseCode": "200",
  "messageType": "Messenger",
  "requestId": "b09c0b68-eda5-4b3c-afa3-dd8329ef5965"
}
{
  "responseFlags": "RL",
  "number": "411",
  "clientDuration": "0",
  "upstreamName": "-",
  "responseCode": "429",
  "messageType": "Messenger",
  "requestId": "b2760d46-69d6-41b7-ab24-b4d4963a8420",
  "httpMethod": "HEAD",
  "systemTime": "2019-12-27T16:07:21.295Z",
  "path": "/",
  "targetDuration": "-",
  "protocol": "HTTP/1.1"
}
{{< /highlight >}}

These access logs can be used to determine common characteristics of offending requests.

A common access logs workflow is to write them to a file on a persistent volume and/or have log exporters persist the
data. An ETL job can parse the access logs to allow admins to drill down into fine-grained information about requests

> that contributed toward rate-limits.

Reviewer: Another workflow worth mentioning might be writing the logs to the stdout stream and having a logging agent aggregate the data and send it to a backend (e.g. elasticsearch, splunk, etc.). Also we could redirect the user [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/logging/) for more info on commonly used logging architectures.

Author: https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/pull/2057/commits/6376b6a6e50fc907158ac6a024235120beb6d2d1

from collections import Counter
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np

def at_least(c, threshold):
    """Return a Counter of values which are at_least (>=) threshold"""
    return Counter(el for el in c.elements() if c[el] >= threshold)

def draw_hist(labels, values):
    indices = np.arange(len(labels))
    width = 1
    plt.bar(indices, values, width)
    plt.xticks(indices + width * 0.5, labels)
    plt.show()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    with open("accesslogs.txt") as f:
        data = [json.loads(line) for line in f]

    number = {line["requestId"]: int(line["number"]) for line in data}
    number_hist_values = at_least(Counter(number.values()), 1)

    labels, values = zip(*reversed(number_hist_values.most_common()))
    draw_hist(labels, values)
```

This script creates a histogram to chart the distribution of requests to each number. We can use this to determine
common message recipients even though the rate limit rule being breached only cares about the message type
(Rule 1, limit all Messenger requests to 2/min ).

Parse the logs and generate a histogram for the number contacted:

```shell
python access_log_parser.py
```

{{% notice note %}}

> Note: on a mac you can try `/usr/bin/python` instead to resolve `ImportError: No module named matplotlib.pyplot`.

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
Note: on macOS you can try `/usr/bin/python` instead to resolve `ImportError: No module named matplotlib.pyplot`.
```
